---
title: "Time wasted for a friend is not wasted at all"
categories: easy
---
Some lore is due. I enjoy tabletop RPGs very much. Me and my friends play in a
few Pathfinder campaigns. I hate rolling for stats. I once got:
**18 16 16 13 11 11**. I was planning to make a dumb Barbarian, and he is
instead the smartest character I played yet, with an Intelligence of 13.
Another player rolled so poorly he had nothing over 15 and two 8.
I feel like the point buy system makes more sense. A friend of mine, let's call
them Mike, **loves** rolling for stats, they want none of that deterministic
point buy stuff.

I am thinking of running a long campaign sooner or later, and I **will** be
allowing a 20 point pool. I don't want to take the fun away from Mike either, so
why not let them roll a random 20 point worth of stats?

I initially wrote the small script to accomplish this using Python, and since I
found out about [Brython](https://brython.info/), I decided to give it a try to host it on a webpage my friend could access easily.

## Can't be that many

Let us formulate the problem. I need to choose
six items (the stats), each of which has a weight (the points) the sum of which
must be equal to 20. Yep, it's good old
[Knapsack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knapsack_problem). Or at least a
variant of it I am not familiar with.

There might exist some heuristic to find a random knapsack solution, but to be
as fair as possible, I would like to enumerate all the feasible solutions and
then choose randomly. Screw the proper formulation, there can't be that many
stat combinations, right? Wrong.

In Pathfinder, the possible values for a score when using the point buy system
range from [7 to 18](https://www.d20pfsrd.com/basics-ability-scores/ability-scores/).
That's 12 values. You have 6 scores to set, so $12^{6} = 2985984$ combinations. Of these, only a very small fraction are actually worth 20 points.

So a naive way to choose your scores could be the following.

```python
import itertools

# Point cost for scores.
POINTS = {
    7: -4,
    ...
    10: 0,
    ...
    18:	17
}

def eval_stats(stats: list):
    return sum([POINTS[x] for x in stats])

def enumerate_all():
    # Six times any value between 7 and 18.
    return itertools.product(*([list(range(7, 19))] * 6))

# Filter for combinations worth 20 points.
possible_stats = [x for x in enumerate_all() if eval_stats(x) == 20]
```

That takes few seconds on my pc. However, when running this using Brython...
I don't know, I haven't seen the output, ever. It takes way too long. That's
just what happens when you run an interpreter on top of another.

## It was that many

We forgot to consider one thing: stats can be rearranged after generation. This
means that all permutations of an array (e.g. **10 10 10 11 11 11** and
**11 11 11 10 10 10**) are equivalent. We can try changing the point of view.
Instead of enumerating the stat combinations, we can try enumerating how many
times each possible score value appears, from 0 to 6 times. This helps us
merge all permutations into one.

So to express a stat array of: `13 12 18 9 14 7`

We would have:
```
( 7) ( 8) ( 9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18)
  1    0    1    0    0    1    1    1    0    0    0    1
```

That's 12 values from 0 to 6 that we need to assign, so $7^{12} = 13841287201$,
which isn't any better. **BUT** since we know that the sum of the values has to
be 6, because we have 6 stats, we can prune a large portion of the combinations.

The new function is the following:

```python
def enumerate_rec(depth: int, already: int) -> list:
    """
    :param depth: How many values are left to set.
    :param already: Sum of previous values.
                    Equivalently, how many stats have been set.
    """
    # Already have 6 stats. The last `depth` values are 0.
    if already > 5:
        return [[0] * depth]

    # Last value in the sequence. Only one value can make 6.
    if depth == 1:
        return [[6 - already]]

    # Enumerate remaining feasible values.
    result = []
    for n in range(7 - already):
        # Get all values compatible with this value being `n`.
        for s in enumerate_rec(depth - 1, n + already):
            result.append([n] + s)

    return result
```

Even with the recursion overhead, the combinations are a little over 12000. This
runs in just a fraction of a second in my browser. Much better. Just filter
again for combinations worth the desired amount of points and pick a random one.

## You're welcome

Mike (and other maniacs) can now just [click here](/projects/mike/mike.html)
and either take the stats or refresh until satisfied.

I'll add a field to set the number of desired points sooner or later. Surely I
am not going to forget. Right?